The last section before
a list of best practices and
what else you can do
is going passwordless.
Remember, the top of our originally
triangle was going passwordless.
So let's remove the password forever.
So today, if you want to be passwordless,
you have Magic Links.
Magic Link says you know what?
I'm checking your email.
I don't even want your password because
someone will break into my systems and
will steal your password, so
don't give me a password please,
she has your email, okay?
And every time you wanna log in,
I will send you a link within like
an one-time password, and
you will log in with that, okay?
This is all the passwordless options,
let's say less secure because of course,
we have one point of failure,
that's the email accounts, if the email
account is hacked, anyone can get in.
So no bank account or
no bank system will use this.
This is for
some websites where security is like
it's not like very strict, it will work.
Then we have OTP,
that's kind of the same thing, but
with SMS one-time password over SMS, I
sent you a code or a Magic Link over SMS.
Okay, but
we know that it also has this problem
that my SIM card can be stolen as well.
And finally, we have passkeys,
that is like the final goal
today in this authentication tunnel,
okay, passkeys.
So let's get deeper with
the idea of passkeys.
Well, first pass keys are just
the new DNA of web of fun.
And if you ask me, I feel like we
will stop using the term WebAuthn,
and we will start talking about passkeys,
okay?
So the idea is to use
WebAuthn as first factor,
that's the idea of a passkey.
That at the end, we can use directly
WebAuthn as the first factor without any
other factor, without passwords,
even without an email address to
contact the user,
it can be a complete anonymous user.
Okay, but that user has the passkey,
the problem with the original
WebAuthn not the original.
The problem with the original
implementations of WebAuthn were
that they were device dependent.
Okay, so the key was restoring the device.
So if you change the device,
you don't have the keys.
With passkeys,
a passkey is a WebAuthn subgroup of
authenticators that are multi-device, how?
They're storing your private keys in
the iCloud, or in Google's account,
or within Microsoft's account,
so then it's multi-device.
So the idea is that if we get to the point
where if you change your device,
you still have access to
the same passkeys, or
if you have multi-devices at home,
you can also reuse your passkeys.
Then we're kind of there,
and that's the idea.
In this case,
authenticators are saving the keys
that we use the term
passkeys in the cloud.
So you can use them on different devices
and even share with other users.
Today, Apple was the first company
implementing passkeys, okay?
So this was implemented since iOS 16 and
since macOS Ventura,
and both are supporting passkeys.
And for example, you can go on your
iPhone to credentials, to passwords.
You will see your passkeys there,
and you can share, with AirDrop,
your passkeys with a friend or
with your partner.
And then your partner will receive
the Passkey, and then he or
she can log in in the same
website with that pass key.
It's like sharing the password.
But now it's not the password
that is insecure, it's a passkey.
And no one can actually, even if someone
can see your public part of the passkey,
nothing happens because you don't have
the private part of your passkey.
That is actually stored
encryptedly in your cloud.
Does it make sense?
And also it includes a conditional UI.
This is part, I think that this is still
the, let's say in mature this part.
The conditional UI, lets the browser owner
complete a login form without the user
typing anything, not even the username.
So it's a complex mechanism.
So in fact, to try this quickly,
if you wanna test past keys and
how they look like,
you can try passkeys.io.
But for that you need
a browser compatible with path
keys is a head Max but
path keys are WebAuthn yes.
But WebAuthn within special
authenticator that is multi device and
that's not available
everywhere these days.
So you can try this on iOS 16 on
Safari 16 on macOS Ventura or greater.
And if you are on desktop Windows,
or Mac, or
Linux, you can use
Chrome Canary these days today,
okay, while shooting this video at least.
So in a few months it will be available
when it's table Chrome Canary
supports passkeys
Chrome Canary on desktop.
I will explain what happens
with Android in a minute, so
passkeys IO will show you
how the UI looks like.
So you put an email here
even if it doesn't exist,
like frontendmasters or
frontend@backend.com.
By the way, look at this,
here you also have a sign in with
passkey directly in the home.
The idea is to make this really quick.
So I say continue, so I will create a new
account and I just set up a passkey.
And you can see that Chrome is
using the passkey word, but
this is Chrome Canary, okay,
it's still not in stable.
So do you wanna create the passkey?
And here it says, this passkey
will only be saved in this device,
this is because I'm not logged in right
now in this particular browser in Canary.
I will put my finger, and I'm logged in.
So now, what's the idea if
I go back to the website?
Okay, let me log out.
When I signed in with pass key I
can just log in with my finger.
On Safari, the UI is already mature,
so it's kind of better.
So passkey.io, I can log in,
let's write another one,
backend@frontend.com.
I'm going to sign up, set up a passkey,
I will use Touch ID or
Face ID, and
this is in the iCloud Keychain.
So I can technically go now to
my iPhone or to my iPad and
using my face, not the real,
not the same finger, but
because with the face or
with the finger, I unlock iCloud.
I can reuse the same passkey and
passkey is appears under system settings,
at least on the Mac and their passwords,
and here they are locked.
So I can see here like,
for example, WebAuth.io,
that's the other one or
passkey.io I can see my passkey from here.
I can see the details,
I can add a password for
the passkey if I want to add from here,
look at this.
I can share the passkey using AirDrop so
I can AirDrop any of you my passkey and
then.
You can log in as myself with my account
because I can share my passkeys.
So now they're gonna not go into shafting
my device not just in my iCloud account,
they're going to be in your
iCloud account as well.
Okay, make sense?
And the next question is what happens if
you are in Google Chrome not supporting
passkeys and you need to log in?
And you're on Windows or Linux.
So when you sign in there,
you will use a phone with QR code.
That option is multi-platform,
multi-browser, multi-operating system.
So if I click there, I get the QR code.
I can use my phone connected
to the same iCloud account and
this is going to connect
through Bluetooth.
Remember, it requires real presence.
Both devices are going to be
connected with Bluetooth,
that means Bluetooth needs
to be on both devices.
And then I can log in on Windows on
Linux with an iPhone with
a passkey that is on iCloud.
Make sense?
So that's how it works,
that's how passkeys work.
What about Android?
So if you search passkeys
Android right now,
you will get into an article from
just a month ago from this recording,
saying that they're bringing passkeys
to Android Chrome, so it's coming.
And today, if you want to play with that,
you can on Chrome Canary, on desktop,
and on Android, Chrome Canary, and
also you need Google Play Services Beta.
So you need to enroll your account,
your Android account,
under Google Play Services Beta.
Wait a couple of hours until the Play
Store replaces your Google Play Services
app in your phone, and then with Chrome
Canary you can try passkeys on Android.
Probably in 2023 this is going
to be available in stable.
Directly, and here you see how
the experience looks like on Android.
So passkeys are multi-vendor,
multi-platform.
The only thing that you need to
implement in your website is WebAuthn.
So our server is passkey compatible
because it's just another
authenticator on top of WebAuthn.
Make sense?
And the final idea is
that if passkeys work.
And users understand what they are,
they will replace passwords
because it's not really secure if you
have passkeys that are really secure.
But as a backup, as a fallback, you have
a password that is one, two, three, four.
If you have that,
then you still have a problem.
So the idea is get rid of the password,
you will only have passkeys that's like
the end goal for web authentication.